# The primary purpose of a development team

Thursday 11 April 2019

Before you read further, take a moment and answer the following question for yourself: what is the primary purpose of a development team?

Don't worry, I'll wait...

Okay, what was your answer? Is it to create working software? (Well, yes.) Is it to complete everything on the sprint backlog (Hmmm... kinda.) Is it Henry, the mild-mannered janitor? (Could b... No!)

Above all, the primary job of an agile development team is to build quality into the product.

That focus on quality is important because it informs us and shapes us in everything we do as a team, from planning through to delivery.

When I introduced agile to one team I worked with it took me a long time to help them get beyond their misconception that agile meant 'quickly hack things together and shove it out the door'. Release early and release often—yes; dirty hacks—no! Done well, agile should be more disciplined than other traditional methodologies and focus on quality.





The agile manifesto values "working software over comprehensive documentation". Working software relies on quality

The first principle of the agile manifesto reads, "our highest priority is to satisfy the customer through early and continuous delivery of valuable software."




### Planning in two acts

During sprint planning the team is asked to answer two questions:

* What can be delivered during this sprint?
* How will this work be achieved?

These don't need to be separate meetings but the order of questions is important: _what_ then _how_.

The Scrum Guide sets aside a maximum of eight hours for a one-month sprint with a recommendation that shorter sprints are proportionally shorter. So, four hours for our two-week sprints.


### Preparation














"To acquire confidence in what it can get done, many development teams break down each targeted feature into a set of tasks [...] The development team then provides an estimate (typically in hours) of the effort required to complete each task. Breaking product backlog items into tasks is a form of design and just-in-time planning for how to get the features done." (_Essential Scrum_ by Kenneth S Rubin, Addison Wesley, 2013)






## Time box




 But let's step back a moment and get a bit existential by asking why we've even here.


### Quality

Before you read further, take a moment and answer the following question for yourself: what is the primary purpose of a development team?

Is it to create working software? (Well, yes.) Is it to complete everything on the sprint backlog (Hmmm... kinda.) Is it Henry, the mild-mannered janitor? (Nope!)

Above all, the primary job of an agile development team is to build quality into the product.

That focus on quality is important because it informs us in everything we do as a team, from planning through to delivery.

When I introduced agile to one team I worked with it took me a long time to help them get beyond their misconception that agile meant 'quickly hack things together and shove it out the door'. Release early and release often—yes; rough hacks—no! Done well, agile is disciplined and focuses on quality.

The fourth principle of DSDM/AgilePM is "never compromise quality".




https://www.mountaingoatsoftware.com/blog/what-is-quality


